
Astronomy is entering a new era of time domain science and large survey datasets, with the Large Synoptic Survey Telescope national facility coming online in a few years, preceded by time-domain surveys such as Palomar Transient Factory and Zwicky Transient Factory, large imaging surveys for dark energy surveys, and time-critical events such as gamma-ray bursts and gravitational waves.  These, especially LSST, will produce a flood of candidate events including supernovae, stellar outbursts, flaring variability from accretion onto supermassive black holes, and yet-uncharacterized transient events.

In the era of LSST our discovery potential will be limited by our ability to follow up and characterize interesting objects found in the time-domain as variable sources, or in the deep imaging survey.  LSST will generate a vast publicly released stream of transient alerts, and even with filtering based on astrophysical knowledge and machine learning (e.g. the ANTARES event broker, reference?), there will be many more events than the community is ready to observe. Follow-up observations including both initial characterization and monitoring of transients will be especially important in the early years of LSST operation to provide feedback into classification algorithms for event brokers. However, the classical mode in which most telescopes are now scheduled, often months ahead, severely limits the ability to trigger time sensitive observations, and makes it difficult to carry out monitoring projects due to limits on time and number of people to observe.  For example, in current telescope scheduling it is difficult to trigger an observation a day after an event, but it is also difficult to take an observation for one hour per night for a week, or one night every week for two months.

Our goal with the Arizona Robotic Telescope Network is to develop a network of telescopes that is flexibly scheduled and has multiple capabilities, including photometry, spectroscopy, wide-field optical imaging, rapid response, and monitoring and survey capabilities. We are updating and integrating multiple small to medium size telescopes (~1-3 meters) on sites operated by Steward Observatory, the Vatican Observatory, and our partners. While there are other telescope networks in planning and operation, our approach is distinct in that we are: 1. upgrading existing facilities at well developed, good sites; 2. planning for heterogeneous systems and capabilities to handle multiple science goals; 3. envisioning the network as a system that can ingest a variety of scientific programs and quickly respond to requests for observations; and 4. developing some level of autonomy, where the network could, for example, take and process follow-up imaging and depending on the result, trigger a spectroscopic observation.  This is an ambitious project and our plan is to work toward it in stages, developing remote and autonomous observing and data processing one site and instrument at a time.

Some of the science cases that motivate this network are:

Transient followup and characterization: Astronomical transients include violent events such as supernovae, gamma-ray bursts, tidal disruption of stars accreted into supermassive black holes, and gravitational-wave events from black hole mergers.  Each of these is critical to observe at early times in its evolution. In addition, LSST will detect many other transients such as massive star outbursts, supernova precursors, and poorly studied phenomena such as kilonovae, and time-sampling and monitoring will be needed to classify these events. Telescopes smaller than LSST that have more flexible scheduling will be vitally important to follow their time evolution.

1. Supernovae (exploding massive stars, or white dwarfs in binaries) are key to the measurement of dark energy, yet there are many unknowns about the progenitors, explosion mechanism, and extinction by circumstellar or interstellar dust. Supernovae evolve on the timescale of days, and require both quick followup and monitoring over days or months, to measure the light curve as it rises to peak and slowly declines, for understanding and calibrating the SN brightness relation; classifying types of supernova and understanding the different progenitor populations; and probing the physics of supernovae and their surrounding medium.  [Nathan Smith, Peter Milne]

2. Gamma-ray bursts are believed to arise from the collapse of very massive stars, or the mergers of compact objects (white dwarfs, neutron stars, black holes). They probe star formation in the early universe, the fates of massive stars, and the physics of compact objects. These extreme events are highly beamed, detected in gamma-rays and X-rays by satellites, and localized by followup of the optical counterpart, when it exists, within minutes to hours. Triggering followup of GRBs in less than a night (sometimes less than an hour) is necessary to measure the decay of the light curve, which probes the GRB physics and is needed to measure the redshift for the most distant GRBs.  [Wenfai Fong, Nathan Smith?]

3. Gravitational wave events from black hole mergers are an exciting field that is now becoming reality with detections from LIGO, and plans to build a space GW detector for supermassive BH mergers. It is unclear if these will have optical counterparts. The duration of an optical transient is likely to be extremely short (minutes-hours?) and current GW detectors do not localize the event to a small area, so it will be necessary to pre-image galaxies likely to host an event, and then rapidly image possible hosts when an event goes off and process them to detect potential counterparts. [Wenfai Fong]

4. Masses of supermassive black holes from reverberation mapping: Galaxies host SMBHs at their centers, which can power quasars and galactic nuclei when active, and have a tight relation between BH mass and galaxy mass, suggesting that the black hole and galaxy regulate evolution in some way. To constrain the evolution we estimate black hole masses in quasars and AGN at high redshift from emission line luminosities and velocity widths. These relations are calibrated through measuring BH masses with reverberation mapping, measuring the time delay between variations in the continuum luminosity and the emission line luminosity to estimate a radius and velocity. This reverberation mapping technique requires monitoring in photometry and in spectra of the emission lines over typical ~1 month time delays. With a large photometric time survey like LSST, it will be possible to do opportunistic RM by watching for quasars or AGN that change strongly in brightness, and triggering spectroscopic monitoring over weeks to months to catch that change echoed in the emission lines. [Ian McGreer, Xiaohui Fan]

5. Late time imaging and spectroscopy of supernovae: By measuring the brightness decay and evolution in spectral features of supernovae  continuing long after the explosion (weeks to months or even years), we can probe the dust and gas around the supernova, as its ejecta expand outward and encounter circumstellar material. For massive-star supernovae, much of the circumstellar material was ejected from the progenitor star itself, allowing us to probe the physics of the star before the explosion. For white-dwarf SN Ia, critical to measuring dark energy, but whose progenitor channels are poorly constrained, the late-time evolution of the light curve gives clues to the ejecta and the physics of supernovae. [Peter Milne, Nathan Smith]

In addition, flexibly scheduled telescopes enable many survey science programs, including outside the time-domain, that are difficult to do currently due to scheduling constraints or limits on how often individuals can be physically present to operate the telescope.


